# MoBi® and Its Building Blocks‌

MoBi® is a systems biology software tool for multiscale physiological modeling and simulation. Within the restrictions of ordinary differential equations, almost any kind of (biological) model can be imported or set up from scratch. Examples include biochemical reaction networks, compartmental disease progression models, or PBPK models. However, de novo development of a PBPK model, for example, is very cumbersome, the preferred procedure is to import them from PK-Sim®. Importantly, MoBi® also allows for the combination of the described examples and thereby is a very powerful tool for modeling and simulation of multi-scale physiological systems covering molecular details and whole-body architecture.

De novo model establishment and simulation is supported by graphical tools and building blocks to support expert users. MoBi® [uses building blocks that are grouped into Molecules, Reactions, Spatial Structures, Passive Transports, Observers, Events, Molecule Start Values, Parameter Start Values, and Observed Data. The different building blocks are described in detail in Part IV, “Working with MoBi®”. Building blocks out of the above-mentioned groups can be combined to generate models. The advantage of building blocks is that they can be reused. For example, a different set of starting values may define a new scenario, situation, or individual. Refine a Reaction(s) network and update it in all tissues where it should be considered.

MoBi® will be described in detail in Part IV, “Working with MoBi®”.